---
title: "Game of the Year 2022"
date: 2022-12-11 00:00:00"
categories: random-thoughts
---

According to my spreadsheet, I played 12 games I hadn’t played before this year to completion, but I combined Monster Hunter and its expansion into one, and the other two don’t really deserve to be on this list (although *Zelda: Phantom Hourglass* would have without stylus controls). I still have two games in progress, but one them (*Utawarerumono: Prelude to the Fallen*) is unlikely to end up on this list (so far), and I’ve played (but never beaten) the second one in the past (*Persona 3*).

### 1. Stray (PS5)
The cat is adorable. The world is both fascinating and depressing. I love the robots. The game provides a nice mix of action sequences and adventure sequences. The cutest part is when the cat sleeps (on PS5 anyway): It rolls into a ball, a purring sounds comes from the controller’s speaker, while the controller gently vibrates. Also the game has a meow button. The only thing that’s missing from it is the ability to customize the cat.

Would I have liked it as much without the cat though? Maybe not.

### 2. Monster Hunter Rise & Sunbreak (PC)
Definitely my most played game this year. Looks great (but not as good as *World*), the new wirebug mechanics are very a nice addition (and I miss them when I play *World*), the new monsters are nice and varied and provide quite the challenge (particularly in Master Rank), and the multiplayer works very well. I also love the addition of the palamute.

### 3. The Last Campfire (PC)
This is a charming exploration game by Hello Game. I like exploration games with puzzle solving and collectibles, so this ticked most of my boxes! It also doesn’t overstay its welcome (I 100%’d it in a weekend) 

### 4. The Forgotten City (PC)
Despite hearing a lot about the game, I wasn't sure what to expect. I had heard about the basic premise, but that was pretty much it. The gameplay is pretty simple at first: walk around this Roman city, talk to the folks, and solve the mystery. There is more than that. Eventually. But I won't go over it as to avoid spoilers. This is one game where you don't want to be spoiled. The various stories are quite interesting, and the overall plot, while fairly predicable at a certain point, was entertaining enough to keep me going and going, and there were plenty of surprises along the way.

I had a great time exploring the city, uncovering and solving its mysteries, talking to its inhabitants! The city itself is very well done.

### 5. Ys IX: Monstrum Nox (PS5)
While I don’t think the game was as good as its predecessor, this one was still a ton of fun: fast and fun combat, with a somewhat engaging story. The exploration was a bit better than in the previous games, due to the new powers. The free-for-all sections were slightly better integrated than in *Ys VIII* in the story and the music, while file during playtime, felt somewhat forgettable, and it didn’t have bangers that will stay in my ‘game’ playlist.

### 6. Ratchet & Clank (PS5)
I installed that one when I got my PS5 mostly because I thought my roommate would enjoy it (he pretty much plays nothing but Mario games), and he did. I played it too, and had a ton of fun. The environments were varied and gorgeous, the combat was engaging, I like the variety of the weapons and, while the story was entirely forgettable, it was still good enough to keep me entertained. 

### 7. Oceanhorn 2: Knights of the Lost Realm (Apple Arcade)
I installed this one as a way to test the 3D performances of my new Apple TV 4K, and then I ended up playing all the way to the end (it took me 16 hours, with an 84% completion). It’s fun! I liked running around the pretty environments and finding treasures and other trinkets (most of them useless). The list of issues with this game is pretty long though: bland combat, a story that is forgettable (and goes pretty weird by the end), stiff character animations… If running around looking for stuff is not your thing, you might want to skip this one. It screams low budget and small team. What this small team built is kind of impressive though!

### 8. Astro’s Playroom
This one feels more like a Playstation nostalgia trip mixed with a tech demo for the new controller, but the controls are pretty tight, the game is fun, the music is good, and it looks great! I kinda wish this had been allowed to be a bigger, longer title… Hopefully Team Asobi (assuming they are still around) gets to make that next!

### 9. Submerged: Hidden Depths
This is almost identical to the first *Submerged* game. It’s very relaxing, and since this is mostly an exploration game, it’s perfect for catching up on podcasts. It’s a nice way to spend a weekend, and doesn’t overstay it’s welcome.

## Quick life update
When my last contract finished at the end of October, I was expecting that it would take me at least until April to find something else, but it turns out I was being pessimistic: I start a new one-year contract in January (with possible extensions). Because of this, my game development and artistic aspirations will be slowed down.